PropBank Unification Documentation - July 2015 - by Tim O'Gorman

The new Unified (AMR-style) PropBank rolesets:

Prior PropBank frame files, and the rolesets (individual senses) 
within them, were subtyped by part of speech tags, and gave 
various senses for a single lemma. Earlier AMR releases utilized 
the verbal subset of those frames, and had annotators generalize 
across parts of speech to the nearest verbal sense. The unified 
PropBank rolesets, in order to add power and coverage to the 
Abstract Meaning Representation project, essentially formalize 
that process by lumping etymologically related lemmas with the 
same sense into the same roleset. These rolesets, in AMR style, 
are now closer to a representation of an actual concept, and 
represent the different forms that the roleset might take with a 
new "alias" element that expresses its possible realizations.

Alias field conventions and assumptions:

* Aliases represent a set of etymologically related lemmas that 
  might be used to refer to that particular roleset.
* All aliases have a lemma and a correponding part of speech tag 
  (the "pos") field, with "v", "n" and "j" representing verbs, 
  nouns and adjectives, respectively.
* Multi-word aliases are separated by an underscore, "_", mostly 
  being verb+particle constructions such as "throw_up".
* Common patterns of how verbs combine with prepositions, objects 
  or adverbs are not currently represented in the alias fields. 
  This means that the sense "have yet to" (have.11) is aliased 
  merely by the verbal alias "have".
* Participles (-ed and -ing forms) will appear as adjectival or 
  nominal aliases only when commonly POS-tagged as such during 
  treebanking.
* All aliases are lemmatized as appropriate for their Treebank 
  part of speech tags, so that adjectives ending in "-ed" (such 
  as "spirited") or nouns ending in "-ing" (such as "accounting") 
  do not have those suffixes removed.

Roleset naming conventions and assumptions:

* Since there are many possible lemmas for each roleset, one can 
  no longer assume that the roleset name and the lemma in the 
  sentence are identical, as one could with prior PropBank releases.
* A roleset is named after the most common verbal alias (if one 
  exists), backing off to nominal and then adjectival aliases 
  if no verbal alias is present.
* Rolesets are always named after one of the aliases, and may be 
  named after verb+particle aliases (as in "throw_up.05")
* Roleset IDs are numbered so that each sense number occurs only 
  once for each frame file. "criticism.04" does not entail that 
  there are three other "criticism" rolesets, but simply that it 
  is the fourth roleset within the frame file "criticize.xml", 
  alongside criticize.01, critical.02 and critical.03.
* Roleset names default to American spelling conventions whenever
  there are multiple spelling variants.

Factors Determining Which Old Rolesets were Merged

* When combining different parts of speech into the new unified 
  rolesets, senses were merged only if they were etymologically 
  related and sufficiently similar in meaning.
* FrameNet and VerbNet were consulted in making these judgements 
  of similarity.
* Rolesets were only merged when they shared the same arguments.
* Some aspectual distinctions were merged into singular frames, 
  but strong differences, such as the difference between causative 
  verbs and states (as in "blacken" and "black") were left separate.

PropBank Frame File conventions:

* Rolesets are clustered into frame files with the intent that 
  relatively simple heuristics should be able to find the frame 
  file containing the correct sense.
* This means that frame files were merged if they contained any 
  overlapping aliases. For example, rolesets for "flee" and "fly" 
  are now both in contained within "fly.xml", so that one might 
  get to the correct frame file when observing the word "flight".

